# Coursera - Getting and Cleaning Data Course 
## Project Assignment Code Book

This file describes the data, the performed transformations to clean up it, and the outputed data structure and its contents.

It assumes you have:  
  - **[R]** and **[RStudio]** already installed in your computer, and
  - **[dplyr]** package already installed.
  - Connection to the internet, as it may need to download some packages.

### Version:

1.0

### The Data Sources Origin:

The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ.  
These time domain signals (prefix 'time' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz.  
Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise.  
Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using
another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz.  

The data sources used in this work originated from:

* [Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones]

and can be downloaded at:

* <https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip>

### The Data Sources Structure:

Directory Name         | File Name           |  File Description                | #Rows | #Columns
-----------------------|---------------------|----------------------------------|-------|----------|
UCI HAR Dataset/       | activity_labels.txt | activity labels file             |     6 |   2
UCI HAR Dataset/       | features.txt        | features file                    |   561 |   2
UCI HAR Dataset/test/  | subject_test.txt    | test subject file                |  2947 |   1
UCI HAR Dataset/train/ | subject_train.txt   | train subject file               |  7352 |   1
UCI HAR Dataset/test/  | X_test.txt          | test data measurements set file  |  2947 | 561
UCI HAR Dataset/train/ | X_train.txt         | train data measurements set file |  7352 | 561
UCI HAR Dataset/test/  | y_test.txt          | test label activity file         |  2947 |   1
UCI HAR Dataset/train/ | y_train.txt         | train label activity file        |  7352 |   1

### The Perfomed Transformations:

The **run_analysis.R** script performs all the necessary data transformations from **raw data** to **tidy data**.  
The following are the general steps executed by the mentioned script:

1) Get and Clean the **Subject** data into a data frame.
* Reads **"test/subject_test.txt"**.
* Reads **"train/subject_train.txt"**.
* Creates a data frame with both **test** and **train** appended.
* Result is returned as a data frame.  

2) Get and Clean the **Label** data into a data frame.
* Reads **"test/y_test.txt"**.
* Reads **"train/y_train.txt"**.
* Reads **"activity_labels.txt"**.
* Creates a data frame with both **test** and **train** appended.
* Creates a new column **ActivityName** via decoding **Activity Number**
* Result is returned as a data frame.  

3) Get and Clean the **Measurament** data into a data frame.
* Reads **"test/X_test.txt"**.
* Reads **"train/X_train.txt"**.
* Reads **"features.txt"** and normalizes its content.
* Creates a data frame with both **test** and **train** appended.
* Rename all the columns in the previous data frame.
* Create a new data frame with only the **mean** and **standard deviation** columns.
* Result is returned as a data frame.  

4) Join in one data frame **subject**, **label** and **measure** data frames, removing unnecessary columns and calculate the **mean**.

5) Write the contents of the final data frame **tidy.df**, into the filesystem file **tidyData.txt**.

6) Housekeepping the environment, removing all leftover of the previous operations, leaving only **tidy.df** in the current session.

*Note:* use the commands below if you want to read the output file generated by the last step

```
        df <- read.table( "tidyData.txt" , header = TRUE , sep = " " )
        dim( df )
        str( df )
        summary( df )
``` 

### 2) Data Structure of the output files

#### File name: **"tidyData.txt"**
Number of columns:  88  
Number of rows   : 180

All these variables had their mean calculated per subject and per activity in order to generate this output.

Set of variables that were estimated:  

    - **mean**: Mean value
    - **std**: Standard deviation
    - **meanFreq**: Weighted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency  

All the actual values in these measurements are the average of its occurrences along a period of time for a particular type of activity.

If required the original data is available in the URL mentioned at the top of this document.










[R]:http://www.r-project.org/
[RStudio]:http://www.rstudio.com/
[dplyr]:http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/dplyr/index.html
[Human Activity Recognition Using Smartphones]:http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones
